# Money Vs Wealth- Don’t get it twisted

Let’s start by revisiting the definition of wealth: 
> Wealth is the freedom to obtain your wants and needs that give you happiness, fulfillment, and peace.

When most people in America think about wealth, it’s rare that money isn’t the first thing to come to mind. But why is money the first thing to come to mind, if wealth is much deeper than just money? There’s a couple common reasons. First off, in a capitalistic society, money represents exchangeable value, so people derive a lot of their personal value from money. In other words, money is the most widely accepted “scoreboard” for people. Subtly but certainly- Americans are programmed to blur the line between their net worth and self worth. Further, another reason that money is associated with a person’s wealth, is because freedom is such a critical piece of building wealth, and money goes along way in providing experiential freedom.

The only component of wealth that experiential freedom guarantees is happiness. If you have effectively unlimited money, then you can focus on using money to create the most with your time instead of your time to maximize money. With that kind of freedom, it’s not hard to be happy, but remember- happiness is fleeting; so buying that next pair of fresh kicks will only make you happy for a bit. Knowing this fact, let’s consider happiness to be the first level in the hierarchy of wealth. Where fulfillment is next in the hierarchy. Fulfillment is anything that you can’t buy that creates durable personal utility. Yes, there’s a contextual irony from the definition, since we were just talking about money, but a couple examples will clarify the relationship between money and fulfillment. For one, consider how much durable personal utility is created from having a high level of physical fitness. It can’t be bought, but it improves almost all aspects of life. Further, consider love from close friends and family. Again, can’t be bought, but has a lasting positive impact. So money can buy the opportunity to be fulfilled, but not fulfillment itself. Like fulfillment, the next tier in the hierarchy of wealth, peace, cannot be bought. As a base of contrast, fulfillment is created with externally facing labor, while peace is created with internally facing labor. Peace is generally described as being aligned, enlightened, present, and satisfied. Obtaining peace is a personal journey but it has the most permanent and positive impact. 

While peace certainly isn’t obtainable with money, it’s a helpful tool to create the space necessary to for the labor required for peace. With that idea in mind, there’s a strong argument that money is the most versatile wealth building tool. In either case, someone looking to build wealth needs to have, at a minimum, the time, knowledge, and effort. Money can buy time and knowledge, but not effort. 

Good news! By reading this you’ve demonstrated at least a piece of the requisite time and effort to build more wealth. And while we’ll never be able to provide all the necessary knowledge here, our goal is to get as close as possible. Knowledge shouldn’t be a barrier to building wealth, but it is because of the pervasive scarcity mindset in the world. Mostly due to people who let their net worth define their self worth, so the less others have the more valuable they feel, relatively. 

Inclusivity and equality are two of the big reasons we’re an open source community. We don’t think the knowledge of wealth and its tools should be a shadowy secret. And since money is the most versatile wealth building tool, a lot of the knowledge here will be about converting time and effort into money. Outside of that topic, the rest of the knowledge will more directly address finding fulfillment and peace with time and effort. In all cases, we encapsulate the actionable knowledge into patterns and tool kits, which is the spirit of the Prosperity Development Kit.
